.TH "make-messages.py" "1" "August 2007" "Django Project" ""
.SH "NAME"
make-messages.py \- Internationalization utility for the Django
web framework
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B make-messages.py\fR [\-a] [\-v] [\-l <locale>] [\-d <domain>]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This script creates or updates one or more message files for a Django app,
a Django project or the Django framework itself.  It should be run from one
of three places: the root directory of a Django app; the root directory
of a Django project; or the root django directory (the one in your PYTHONPATH,
not the root of a Subversion checkout).
.sp
The script will run over the source tree of an application, project or Django
itself (depending on where it is invoked), pulling out all strings marked for
translation and creating or updating a standard PO-format message file for the
specified language. Refer to Django's internationalization documentation for
details of where this file is created.
.sp
The \fI\-a\fR and \fI\-l\fR options are used to control whether message
catalogs are created for all locales, or just a single one.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.I \-a
Run make-messages for all locales specified in the Django settings file. Cannot
be used in conjuntion with \fI\-l\fR.
.TP
.I \-d <domain>
Specifies the translation domain to use. Valid domains are \fIdjango\fR or
\fIdjangojs\fR, depending on whether you wish to generate translation strings
for the Python or JavaScript components of your app, your project or the
framework itself.  The default domain is \fIdjango\fR.
.TP
.I \-l <locale>
Extract messages for a particular locale.
.TP
.I \-v
Run verbosely.

.SH "ENVIRONMENT"
.TP
.I DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE
This environment variable defines the settings module to be read.
It should be in Python-import form, e.g. "myproject.settings".

.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Django internationalization documentation:
.sp
.I http://www.djangoproject.com/documentation/i18n/
.sp
The PO file format is documented in the GNU gettext documentation.

.SH "AUTHORS/CREDITS"
Originally developed at World Online in Lawrence, Kansas, USA. Refer to the
AUTHORS file in the Django distribution for contributors.

.SH "LICENSE"
New BSD license. For the full license text refer to the LICENSE file in the
Django distribution.

