==========================
Django 1.8.3 release notes
==========================

*July 8, 2015*

Django 1.8.3 fixes several security issues and bugs in 1.8.2.

Also, ``django.utils.deprecation.RemovedInDjango20Warning`` was renamed to
``RemovedInDjango110Warning`` as the version roadmap was revised to 1.9, 1.10,
1.11 (LTS), 2.0 (drops Python 2 support). For backwards compatibility,
``RemovedInDjango20Warning`` remains as an importable alias.

Denial-of-service possibility by filling session store
======================================================

In previous versions of Django, the session backends created a new empty record
in the session storage anytime ``request.session`` was accessed and there was a
session key provided in the request cookies that didn't already have a session
record. This could allow an attacker to easily create many new session records
simply by sending repeated requests with unknown session keys, potentially
filling up the session store or causing other users' session records to be
evicted.

The built-in session backends now create a session record only if the session
is actually modified; empty session records are not created. Thus this
potential DoS is now only possible if the site chooses to expose a
session-modifying view to anonymous users.

As each built-in session backend was fixed separately (rather than a fix in the
core sessions framework), maintainers of third-party session backends should
check whether the same vulnerability is present in their backend and correct
it if so.

Header injection possibility since validators accept newlines in input
======================================================================

Some of Django's built-in validators
(:class:`~django.core.validators.EmailValidator`, most seriously) didn't
prohibit newline characters (due to the usage of ``$`` instead of ``\Z`` in the
regular expressions). If you use values with newlines in HTTP response or email
headers, you can suffer from header injection attacks. Django itself isn't
vulnerable because :class:`~django.http.HttpResponse` and the mail sending
utilities in :mod:`django.core.mail` prohibit newlines in HTTP and SMTP
headers, respectively. While the validators have been fixed in Django, if
you're creating HTTP responses or email messages in other ways, it's a good
idea to ensure that those methods prohibit newlines as well. You might also
want to validate that any existing data in your application doesn't contain
unexpected newlines.

:func:`~django.core.validators.validate_ipv4_address`,
:func:`~django.core.validators.validate_slug`, and
:class:`~django.core.validators.URLValidator` are also affected, however, as
of Django 1.6 the ``GenericIPAddresseField``, ``IPAddressField``,
``SlugField``, and ``URLField`` form fields which use these validators all
strip the input, so the possibility of newlines entering your data only exists
if you are using these validators outside of the form fields.

The undocumented, internally unused ``validate_integer()`` function is now
stricter as it validates using a regular expression instead of simply casting
the value using ``int()`` and checking if an exception was raised.

Denial-of-service possibility in URL validation
===============================================

:class:`~django.core.validators.URLValidator` included a regular expression
that was extremely slow to evaluate against certain invalid inputs. This
regular expression has been simplified and optimized.

Bugfixes
========

* Fixed ``BaseRangeField.prepare_value()`` to use each ``base_field``â€™s
  ``prepare_value()`` method (:ticket:`24841`).

* Fixed crash during :djadmin:`makemigrations` if a migrations module either
  is missing ``__init__.py`` or is a file (:ticket:`24848`).

* Fixed ``QuerySet.exists()`` returning incorrect results after annotation with
  ``Count()`` (:ticket:`24835`).

* Corrected ``HStoreField.has_changed()`` (:ticket:`24844`).

* Reverted an optimization to the CSRF template context processor which caused
  a regression (:ticket:`24836`).

* Fixed a regression which caused template context processors to overwrite
  variables set on a ``RequestContext`` after it's created (:ticket:`24847`).

* Prevented the loss of ``null``/``not null`` column properties during field
  renaming of MySQL databases (:ticket:`24817`).

* Fixed a crash when using a reverse one-to-one relation in
  ``ModelAdmin.list_display`` (:ticket:`24851`).

* Fixed quoting of SQL when renaming a field to ``AutoField`` in PostgreSQL
  (:ticket:`24892`).

* Fixed lack of unique constraint when changing a field from
  ``primary_key=True`` to ``unique=True`` (:ticket:`24893`).

* Fixed queryset pickling when using ``prefetch_related()`` after deleting
  objects (:ticket:`24831`).

* Allowed using ``choices`` longer than 1 day with ``DurationField``
  (:ticket:`24897`).

* Fixed a crash when loading squashed migrations from two apps with a
  dependency between them, where the dependent app's replaced migrations are
  partially applied (:ticket:`24895`).

* Fixed recording of applied status for squashed (replacement) migrations
  (:ticket:`24628`).

* Fixed queryset annotations when using ``Case`` expressions with ``exclude()``
  (:ticket:`24833`).

* Corrected join promotion for multiple ``Case`` expressions. Annotating a
  query with multiple  ``Case`` expressions could unexpectedly filter out
  results (:ticket:`24924`).

* Fixed usage of transforms in subqueries (:ticket:`24744`).

* Fixed ``SimpleTestCase.assertRaisesMessage()`` on Python 2.7.10
  (:ticket:`24903`).

* Provided better backwards compatibility for the ``verbosity`` argument in
  ``optparse`` management commands by casting it to an integer
  (:ticket:`24769`).

* Fixed ``prefetch_related()`` on databases other than PostgreSQL for models
  using UUID primary keys (:ticket:`24912`).

* Fixed removing ``unique_together`` constraints on MySQL (:ticket:`24972`).

* Fixed crash when uploading images with MIME types that Pillow doesn't detect,
  such as bitmap, in ``forms.ImageField`` (:ticket:`24948`).

* Fixed a regression when deleting a model through the admin that has a
  ``GenericRelation`` with a ``related_query_name`` (:ticket:`24940`).

* Reallowed non-ASCII values for ``ForeignKey.related_name`` on Python 3 by
  fixing the false positive system check (:ticket:`25016`).

* Fixed inline forms that use a parent object that has a ``UUIDField`` primary
  key and a child object that has an ``AutoField`` primary key
  (:ticket:`24958`).

* Fixed a regression in the ``unordered_list`` template filter on certain
  inputs (:ticket:`25031`).

* Fixed a regression in ``URLValidator`` that invalidated Punycode TLDs
  (:ticket:`25059`).

* Improved ``pyinotify`` ``runserver`` polling (:ticket:`23882`).
