2.1.0 Release Notes
===================

Channels 2.1 brings a few new major changes to Channels as well as some more
minor fixes. In addition, if you've not yet seen it, we now have a long-form
:doc:`tutorial </tutorial/index>` to better introduce some of the concepts
and sync versus async styles of coding.


Major Changes
-------------

Async HTTP Consumer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There is a new native-async HTTP consumer class,
``channels.generic.http.AsyncHttpConsumer``. This allows much easier writing
of long-poll endpoints or other long-lived HTTP connection handling that
benefits from native async support.

You can read more about it in the :doc:`/topics/consumers` documentation.


WebSocket Consumers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These consumer classes now all have built-in group join and leave functionality,
which will make a consumer join all group names that are in the iterable
``groups`` on the consumer class (this can be a static list or a ``@property``
method).

In addition, the ``accept`` methods on both variants now take an optional
``subprotocol`` argument, which will be sent back to the WebSocket client as
the subprotocol the server has selected. The client's advertised subprotocols
can, as always, be found in the scope as ``scope["subprotocols"]``.


Nested URL Routing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``URLRouter`` instances can now be nested inside each other and, like Django's
URL handling and ``include``, will strip off the matched part of the URL in the
outer router and leave only the unmatched portion for the inner router, allowing
reuseable routing files.


Login and Logout
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As well as overhauling the internals of the ``AuthMiddleware``, there are now
also ``login`` and ``logout`` async functions you can call in consumers to
log users in and out of the current session.

Due to the way cookies are sent back to clients, these come with some caveats;
read more about them and how to use them properly in :doc:`/topics/authentication`.


In-Memory Channel Layer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The in-memory channel layer has been extended to have full expiry and group
support so it should now be suitable for drop-in replacement for most
test scenarios.


Testing
~~~~~~~

The ``ChannelsLiveServerTestCase`` has been rewritten to use a new method for
launching Daphne that should be more resilient (and faster), and now shares
code with the Daphne test suite itself.

Ports are now left up to the operating
system to decide rather than being picked from within a set range. It also now
supports static files when the Django ``staticfiles`` app is enabled.

In addition, the Communicator classes have gained a ``receive_nothing`` method
that allows you to assert that the application didn't send anything, rather
than writing this yourself using exception handling. See more in the
:doc:`/topics/testing` documentation.


Origin header validation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As well as removing the ``print`` statements that accidentally got into the
last release, this has been overhauled to more correctly match against headers
according to the Origin header spec and align with Django's ``ALLOWED_HOSTS``
setting.

It can now also enforce protocol (``http`` versus ``https``) and port, both
optionally.


Bugfixes & Small Changes
------------------------

* ``print`` statements that accidentally got left in the ``Origin`` validation
  code were removed.

* The ``runserver`` command now shows the version of Channels you are running.

* Orphaned tasks that may have caused warnings during test runs or occasionally
  live site traffic are now correctly killed off rather than letting them die
  later on and print warning messages.

* ``WebsocketCommunicator`` now accepts a query string passed into the
  constructor and adds it to the scope rather than just ignoring it.

* Test handlers will correctly handle changing the ``CHANNEL_LAYERS`` setting
  via decorators and wipe the internal channel layer cache.

* ``SessionMiddleware`` can be safely nested inside itself rather than causing
  a runtime error.


Backwards Incompatible Changes
------------------------------

* The format taken by the ``OriginValidator`` for its domains has changed and
  ``*.example.com`` is no longer allowed; instead, use ``.example.com`` to match
  a domain and all its subdomains.

* If you previously nested ``URLRouter`` instances inside each other both would
  have been matching on the full URL before, whereas now they will match on the
  unmatched portion of the URL, meaning your URL routes would break if you had
  intended this usage.
